About The Purpose-Driven® Church

Every church is driven by something. Tradition, finances, programs, personalities, events, seekers, and even buildings can each be the controlling force in a church. But Rick Warren believes that in order for a church to be healthy it most become a purpose-driven church, built around the five New Testament purposes given to the church by Jesus. “The issue is church health, not church growth!” declares Warren. “If your church is healthy, growth will occur naturally. Healthy, consistent growth is the result of balancing the five biblical purposes of the church.”

In this landmark book, you’ll learn the secret behind the fastest growing Baptist church in American history. Saddleback Church grew from one family to over 10,000 in worship attendance in just fifteen years, while planting twenty-six other churches . . . and without owning a building. Founding pastor Rick Warren shares a proven five-part strategy that will enable your church to grow . . . warmer through fellowship, deeper through discipleship, stronger through worship, broader through ministry, and larger through evangelism.

The Purpose-Driven® Church shifts the focus away from church building programs to emphasizing a people-building process. Warren says, “If you will concentrate on building people, God will build the church.”

Discover in these pages the practical insights and helpful principles that Rick Warren has taught in seminars to over 22,000 pastors and church leaders from sixty denominations and forty-two countries.

THE PURPOSE DRIVEN CHURCH

Growth Without Compromising Your Message & Mission

RICK WARREN

Contents

Part One • Seeing the Big Picture

1. The Saddleback Story

2. Myths About Growing Churches

Part Two • Becoming a Purpose-Driven Church

3. What Drives Your Church?

4. The Foundation for a Healthy Church

5. Defining Your Purposes

6. Communicating Your Purposes

7. Organizing Around Your Purposes

8. Applying Your Purposes

Part Three • Reaching Out to Your Community

9. Who Is Your Target?

10. Knowing Whom You Can Best Reach

11. Developing Your Strategy

Part Four • Bringing In a Crowd

12. How Jesus Attracted Crowds

13. Worship Can Be a Witness

14. Designing a Seeker-Sensitive Service

15. Selecting Your Music

16. Preaching to the Unchurched

Part Five • Building Up the Church

17. Turning Attenders into Members (Congregation)

18. Developing Mature Members (Committed)

19. Turning Members into Ministers (Core)

20. God’s Purpose for Your Church

contact

SADDLEBACK SEMINARS

Lake Forest, CA 92630

Phone: 949-586-2000

Fax: 949-581-7614

http://www.saddleback.com

About the Author

Dr. Rick Warren is the founding pastor of Saddleback Church in Lake Forest, California, one of America's largest congregations. Over half a million copies of his book, The Purpose-Driven® Church, have been sold in 17 languages. It was also included in 100 Christian Books That Changed the Century, which was a result of a national survey. Warren also founded Pastors.com, an online community for ministers on the Internet. Over 60,000 pastors worldwide subscribe to his free, weekly email newsletter, “Rick Warren's Ministry Toolbox.”

When you are on the go, listen to Rick Warren read
