
The Explorer's Guide to Manifesting
Steve Pavlina
© 2018 by Pavlina LLC

https://stevepavlina.com/


Here are my favorite and most effective guidelines for exploring the manifestation of your intentions.


1. Focus on Your Desires

If you focus your attention on what you already have, which is easy to do by default, you'll naturally perpetuate the status quo and continue to experience more of the same. So if you want to experience something different, you actually have to shift your focus away from your current reality and onto something new.

If you focus on what you don't want, such by consuming media that habitually calls out undesirable happenings in the world, you're likely to attract more of what you don't want. Your vibe will sync with your focus, and your reality will sync with your vibe.

To change your present reality, focus your attention on what you desire to experience. Make this a deliberate daily activity. To be truly outstanding at manifesting, invest more time and energy focusing on your desired reality than upon your old one. This is especially critical if you'd like to change your current reality and experience something different than what you already have.

This doesn't mean ignoring what's already real. Just don't dwell on the negative or unwanted aspects. Whenever you spot a problem or challenge, quickly shift your focus to a more desirable alternative. Keep asking: What do I want instead of this? What do I want to create here? What would the solution look like?

Do the same when you encounter negative news. Keep bouncing back to the positive side. Ask again and again, What would I like to see instead of this? What's a more positive alternative? How could this situation be better?

Dwelling on what you don't want – and especially complaining about it – helps no one. To move into a better reality, cultivate the habit of consciously shifting your attention to focus on what you do want. Don't worry about perfection. Just keep aiming for a reality that's a little more desirable.


2. Visualize Future Memories

Practice visualizing your desired reality. A nice way to do this is to sit down for about 20 minutes, and invite your mind to explore possible future memories.

The key is to create and experience real scenes, just like you might relive past memories. Use your mind to create new memories of the future.

Pick a positive memory from your past, and re-experience it in your mind. How do you present the memory to yourself? Do you relive it in an associated way, as if you're in the scene? Do you project it onto a movie screen and watch it?

Use the same approach to imagine your future memories. Picture them and animate them in the same way you might recall your past memories.

If you'd like to manifest a new direction for your life, don't focus so much on creating future memories of the time when the desire initially shows up. Instead, project past the front end of your desire by an extra year or two.

Imagine what it would be like if you'd already been experiencing your desire for a significant length of time – long enough to be firmly settled into that new reality.

It's important to distinguish between the vibe of a desire when it first manifests, which can involve a more excited and chaotic state of being, versus the vibe of maintaining your new reality for the long run.

Suppose you manifest a major increase in your income or a wonderful new relationship. When such a desire first enters your reality, you may be extra excited about it. You may feel a little anxious or surprised by the new experience. Ideally this isn't the vibe you want to create when intending to manifest your desire. This is a temporary vibe, and you probably don't want your desire to manifest only temporarily or to tease you by dipping into and then out of your present reality.

The vibe you want to create is the long-term vibe. This is the vibe of actually holding your desire, not the vibe of first summoning it. So visualize memories of holding the desire, as if you've already been living with it for a year or longer. It's not new anymore. You're used to it.

The vibe of holding a desire (as opposed to summoning a desire) is usually more relaxed, comfortable, contented, and centered. There's less surprise and more expectation of continuance. After all, you've already been experiencing this desire for a year or more. You've been there for a while, so you feel more secure in holding onto this desire.

This approach will not only help you gently manifest a new intention – it will also help you maintain your manifestation after it shows up.


3. Surrender

Resisting your present reality is like slamming the brakes on your positive intentions. Resisting reality yields a resistant vibe, and a resistant vibe will broadcast resistance towards your positive intentions too.

What you want to create is an accepting vibe with respect to what already exists. Surrender to your current reality, no matter how undesirable it may seem. Your present reality is here now, so it's real. Don't resist its existence since that will only disempower you, like pushing against a boulder that won't budge.

Don't make the mistake of trying to resist your resistance either. When you notice yourself feeling resistant, surrender to that as well. Such a feeling is also part of your present reality, so it too is real. Resisting what's real won't help you create what you want.

To create what you want, surrender to what has already been created. If you catch yourself feeling resistant, forgive yourself for harboring such feelings. Keep forgiving yourself, and keep surrendering to what is. This will help you free up blocked energy and get it flowing again; then you can redirect that energy with positive intent.


4. Detach From Specific Outcomes

A common manifestation mistake is succumbing to attachment regarding specific outcomes. Trying to manifest a specific relationship partner (such as someone you already know), a singular job promotion, or a narrow set of results is a trap. Such attachment to specific outcomes ultimately stems from fear – the fear that if your target outcome falls through, then maybe there won't be anything better.

Don't be clingy or needy with regard to specific outcomes. This restricts the flow of energy. This one mistake is enough to block your intentions from manifesting.

Your task is to hold the intention and to harness the matching vibe. Then relax and stay detached. Let the universe determine how that shows up.

Your intention is an energy signature. The reason to do visualization is to help you lock onto and create that matching energy signature. Don't get hung up on the specific outcome as an end unto itself though. Realize that what you're really inviting is a new reality that matches your new energy signature. If you get caught up on the specifics, you'll most likely lose the energy signature because you'll be weaving in some neediness and attachment into your vibe. That's a trap you'll want to avoid.

The universe may bring you what you expect. But often it will bring you something different than what you expected in terms of the exact specifics. You may manifest a different relationship partner, a different income stream, or a different opportunity than the one you initially expected.

It's okay to expect your intention to show up, but be flexible with your expectations. Expect the universe to bring you a reality that matches your vibe. Don't expect the universe to bring you an outcome that you're trying to manifest from a vibe of attachment and clinginess because that's the vibe of lack. The vibe of needing a specific outcome is congruent with not having that outcome. So only use the vibe of neediness if you want to slow yourself down.


5. Talk to the Simulator Directly

Speak aloud to your reality – to the simulator itself. Assume it's always listening.

Look up at the ceiling, and voice your intentions aloud as verbal commands.

Bring me an extra $20,000… just for fun.

Bring me a new relationship partner who gives great massages.

Bring me a free trip to Paris.

Another effective variation is to declare your desires as already real.

Hey… an extra $20,000 just showed up. I love how that keeps happening!

Thank you for that awesome massage. It feels so good!

Oh how delightful… I'm going to Paris again for free. Merci!

Don't ask the simulator for what you want. Don't beg. Be the creator.


6. Turn Towards Fear

Fear is a powerful and attractive vibe. If you have some fear connected with your intention, the fear will alter what you manifest. This is the case whether the fear is acknowledged openly or subconsciously suppressed. To become more powerful at manifesting, here's a good rule of thumb: Whatever you fear, you must face.

If you allow fear to fester beneath the surface, the fear will limit and constrain you by corrupting your vibe. Whenever you try to manifest a powerful intention, you'll simultaneously be emanating some fear as well. The fear energy will mix with your positive intentions, slowing them down at best and derailing them at worst.

Think of yourself as a a light bulb that's always shining. Your current vibe is always broadcasting. You're always in the process of attracting and creating a reality that matches your vibe.

What irrational fears can you identify right now? Are you afraid of stepping into a bigger life purpose? Are you afraid of public speaking? What about voicing an unpopular opinion and being judged by others? What scares you? What have you been avoiding? How have you been hiding?

If you want to become more powerful at manifesting, then whatever fears you suspect you'll eventually need to face, you're right. You'll eventually need to face those fears. Fear is trapped energy, and you'll want to get that energy unblocked and flowing at some point. Otherwise you'll always be dimming your light to some degree.

The more you can identify fears and face them, the more you'll purge the vibe of fear from your being, and the more easily you'll be able to manifest increasingly powerful intentions.

On the other side of fear is more energy, and more energy invites more creative flow.

That said, fear does serve a valuable purpose. Fear is essentially the brake pedal of manifesting. When you mix fear into your vibe, you stabilize your current reality and prevent yourself from quickly sliding into a new one. So fear allows you to spend more time in your current reality, soaking up its experiences and lessons.

When you're ready to move on from your current reality and experience a new one, that's a good time to start leaning in the direction of your fears. But if you'd rather keep experiencing more of the same, there's no immediate pressure to face your fears. You can leave the brake on for as long as you desire.


7. Release Partial Matches

Beware the partial match. A partial match is about 50-70% of what you actually want to experience, but it lacks the ability to achieve 80-100% alignment. When a partial match shows up, acknowledge it as a good step in the right direction, and appreciate it for what it is. Then release it and move on.

Partial matches are potential traps. They'll seduce you with the false impression that they'll someday become 80-100% of what you want, but a partial match will repeatedly leave you with significantly less than you desire. If you say yes to a partial match and become fixated on it, then you're shifting your vibe to match its frequency and losing sight of your greater desire. If you settle for less than you want, you're settling for something you don't actually want. Do your best to realize that a partial match is a non-match.

Partial matches often show up as potentially lucrative work projects that require you to do work you don't enjoy. They show up as relationships that feel more draining than energizing, even though they might have many appealing qualities at first glance. Partial matches are the empty calories of manifestation.

Partial matches do serve a purpose though. They help you explore the possibility space around your desire and gain more clarity about what you really want. They're part of the manifestation process. A partial match shows up as your vibe begins shifting in a new direction.

In the long run though, be careful not to settle for the shadow of your desire. Keep affirming the complete desire in terms of the vibe you actually want to experience.

If you suspect you're stuck with a partial match instead of your genuine desire, you're right – that's a partial match.

Releasing partial matches can be very difficult. They frequently show up as local maxima, so it will often appear that if you release them and move on, your reality will get worse before it can get better. Usually this perception is a bit of an illusion though. When people do release partial matches, they usually feel immediate relief as their vibes rebound, which puts them in range of better matches more quickly than anticipated.


8. Keep Your Powe

To manifest powerfully, remember that you're already powerful. Don't treat anything external as a power source unto itself.

People often make this mistake when trying to manifest money. Instead of manifesting from a vibe of strength, they infect their vibe with neediness and doubt. They treat money as an external power source, such that when it arrives, they expect to gain capabilities that they don't currently seem to have. Somehow they believe the money will make them stronger and more capable.

If you tell yourself that you need money, a relationship, or any other manifestation to gain power, and then you try to manifest that so-called power source, your efforts will likely fail. That's because you're simultaneously reinforcing the expectation (i.e. the intention) that something external is more powerful than you are. And therefore that external power source must be powerful enough to decline your invitation.


9. Play

Take time to play and enjoy life. Have fun for the sake of having fun. The state of enjoyment is a powerful attractor.

See a movie that you want to see. Play a silly game with friends. Spend a day at an amusement park. Immerse yourself in fun activities guilt-free.

The vibe you create through these fun explorations matters more than the activities themselves. Be careful not to succumb to fake fun, such as flowing more energy into hollow or addictive pursuits that aren't as fun as you'd hoped. If an activity you claim to do for fun no longer syncs up with the vibe of fun, let it go. Every fun activity has a lifespan, so in order to stay in sync with the vibe of fun, you must allow the manifestation of fun to shift around dynamically. If you try to lock onto a static activity to consistently maintain the vibe of fun, you'll soon lose the vibe. This universe is much too slippery to permit you to stop growing like that.


10. Gamify Your Intentions

Turn your manifestation experiments into games. A good way to do this is by using intentional tracers.（https://www.stevepavlina.com/blog/2010/04/intentional-tracers/）

Don't just try to manifest a dollar. See if you can manifest ketchup and a dollar appearing at the same time.

Don't just try to manifest a new relationship. Invite a relationship that shows up with popcorn.

Treat the universe as a game-like simulation where anything is possible. Give the simulator a bigger manifesting challenge than you initially think is reasonable. See what happens. You may be surprised.


11. Feel Appreciation & Gratitude

Appreciation is a powerful attractor regardless of where it's directed. The more you can appreciate what you have in your life right now, the more you'll continue to attract that which you'll appreciate.

Spend at least a minute or two each day appreciating what's already present in your reality. Appreciate your tools. Appreciate your food. Appreciate your city. Appreciate the people you see each day. Appreciate your body. Thank the people in your reality.

Now and then, say thank you aloud to the universe. Thank the universe for anything you like and appreciate about this reality. Keep saying thank you because this invites more to be thankful for.


12. Conduct Manifestation Experiments

Actively experiment with forming and holding intentions to map out the space of possibilities. This is important for learning which methods generate the best results for you.

From November 2005 to February 2007, I ran a public manifestation experiment on my blog called The Million Dollar Experiment.（https://www.stevepavlina.com/million-dollar-experiment/） The goal of the experiment was to attempt to use the power of intention to manifest $1 million for each person who chose to participate. It was 100% free with no costs of any kind.

Each person who chose to participate agreed to consciously hold the following intention:

In an easy and relaxed manner, in a healthy and positive way, in its own perfect time, for the highest good of all, I intend $1,000,000 to come into my life and into the lives of everyone who holds this intention.

Participants were provided with the following instructions:

Consciously think about the intention above for just 60 seconds per day. Sometime each day remind yourself to pause, take a deep breath, review the intention, focus your creative conscious energy on it with the expectation that it will manifest, and then release it completely. Allow the universe to handle the details. You're always free to do more, but commit yourself to at least 60 seconds each day for as long as you wish to continue the experiment. Treat it like an item on your daily to do list, or establish a regular time to make it a habit.

Spend time each day thinking about this intention. You can write it down, post it on a wall, recite it aloud, memorize it, visualize it happening, sing it, express it artistically, blog about it, discuss it with others, meditate on it, pray it, or otherwise put some positive thought energy behind it. Tell the universe to "make it so" in whatever way you feel is a good fit for your current belief system.

You don't have to physically do anything until and unless you feel intuitively guided to do so. Allow the universe to handle the details, and don't be concerned with how the money will manifest. Just focus on the intention while remaining detached from any particular outcome. Stay on the lookout for synchronicities (i.e. unusual coincidences) and new opportunities that may come into your life as a result of this experiment, especially within the first 48 hours. And when a new opportunity comes to you as a result of this intention, take advantage of it if you feel inspired to act.

A total of 1730 people participated in the experiment publicly, although not everyone started at the same time. Those people reported manifesting a combined total of $1,247,929.17 in extra money.

This wasn't a scientific experiment, nor was it ever intended to be, so please don't take it as such. This experiment was an invitation for interested people to explore together and see what would happen.

During the experiment my blogging income increased significantly – by around a factor of 10 if I recall correctly. I also noted that tens of thousands of extra dollars flowed to me during this time in fairly indirect ways, such as a book publisher coming to me with a book deal that included a $50,000 advance. That book, Personal Development for Smart People,（https://www.stevepavlina.com/personal-development-for-smart-people/） was published in 2008 and has since been translated into more than a dozen languages. Yet I never solicited a book deal. I never sent out any manuscripts. I didn't have an agent either. The publisher came to me. I was offered a book deal before I'd written a single word of the book. Fascinating, wouldn't you agree?

I encourage you to conduct your own manifestation experiments. Don't treat them as scientific experiments because they really aren't about measuring what already exists. These types of experiments involve exploring what could be. Think of it like experimenting in the kitchen by concocting something new. You aren't trying to replicate a predictable outcome. You're expressing your creativity.


13. Celebrate Partial Successes

If you try to manifest a million dollars this week and only manifest an extra $20, was that a complete failure? A small gain is still a gain, so consider such a result a step in the right direction.

If you get any sort of positive result, celebrate it as a success. Keep leaning in the direction of your desires, even if you're only taking baby steps. This is a good way to invite stronger results.

The alternative is to feel disappointment, and disappointment will only cause you to attract more of what you don't want. When a small positive shift shows up within the first day or two after you set a new intention, treat it as an alpha reflection. That's your receipt from the universe, acknowledging that your greater intention has been received, and the manifestation of that intention is already on its way.


14. Practice Creative Observation

Recognize that all observation is biased. There's no such thing as a completely neutral and unbiased human observer – that's pure fiction. You're a subjective being with your own point of view, and there's no getting around that. So if you're going to be biased anyway when observing your reality, go ahead and deliberately slant your bias to favor your intentions.

What's the alternative anyway? You can't avoid bias, so you're either biased towards your intentions or away from them. If you don't deliberately bias yourself in the positive direction, you're at risk of drifting into negative bias, which means you'd be inviting some degree of self-sabotage. So if you must act out a self-fulfilling prophecy, then lean in the direction of fulfilling a prophecy you like, as opposed to fulfilling one you dislike.

What if you take this too far? Wouldn't it be even riskier to overdo this and succumb to self-delusion by pretending that your life is all roses when it really isn't? My answer to that is: Not really… not if you approach this intelligently.

When you apply creative observation correctly, you're still acknowledging observable reality and surrendering to what is. You're not denying what already exists. It's the denial of what's already present that gets you into trouble. Denial is what puts you squarely in the realm of self-delusion. So don't try to deny what's already present.

Instead, you must say "Yes, and …" to what's already present. Surrender to what is, and use your creativity to imagine a desirable future trajectory. Project a positive momentum onto your present reality. Use your creativity to see your reality shifting in the direction you'd like it to go. Intend improvement. Intend positive change. See this change happening in your mind's eye. Create the vibe associated with this change, just like how you might anticipate an enjoyable weekend coming up while you're still at work on Friday.

When you're surfing a wave of energy, you don't control the wave. That part is out of your control. But you can control how you use the surfboard that's riding the wave. To deny the wave's existence would be foolish. But you can still consciously imagine where you want your surfboard to go, and this will help your body align with your intended reality. That's creative observation.


15. Use Direct Action

The best tools of manifestation are your own hands and feet.

If you set an intention, and you aren't eventually moved into action as part of the manifestation process, that's a hint and a half that you're probably still harboring some fear or resistance to block the intention from fully manifesting.

Don't try to push yourself into stressed action with self-discipline alone. Instead, seek to face and dissolve the resistance that keeps you from aligning the movement of your body with the intentions of your mind.

Powerful intentions summon waves of energy. Usually those waves will animate your body into motion as part of your reality brings itself into alignment with those waves. If your body resists these waves or fails to catch them, like a surfer failing to catch an ocean wave, the intention may manifest a new reality, but you'll remain stuck in the old one. The wave will reach the shore without you.

Don't force yourself to take action when you really don't feel like it. But do pay attention to the subtle urges to act. Notice when the universe is nudging you to align your surfboard with the waves being generated. These signals may show up as a gentle compulsion to send an email, drive somewhere, or make a purchase. When you receive such a nudge that you sense may be aligned with your intention, take immediate action, and keep flowing with any additional nudges that strike you as related. Ride these waves of action for as long as you can. To dismiss such impulses is to dismiss your desired manifestation.


16. Go Big

Small intentions can be fun to play with, but if you really want to put your manifestation skills to the test, go big. If you aren't willing to go big, is it possibly because you're afraid of what will happen? Maybe you're afraid that if you try to go big, you'll fail. Maybe you're afraid you'll succeed, and then what? Will you feel compelled to go even bigger?

What if you try to manifest something huge, and it actually shows up? Will you be able to maintain that reality without slipping backwards? Will you fear losing what you've gained if your gains are substantial?

If you hold back and constantly play it small, examine why you're holding back. Set big intentions anyway, and see what forms of resistance show up. Work through each mode of resistance, and release it. Keep leaning in the direction of going big with your intentions.

Look at your current intentions. Consider that you're probably still playing
small. What would you intend if you were 10x more powerful at manifesting? Those are the real intentions to set today. Bigger intentions channel more energy.

* * *
For more tips and articles related to manifesting intentions, explore the Creating Reality section of Steve's blog: StevePavlina.com/Creating-Reality.

Special thanks to Rachelle Fordyce.
